---
title: Configuration file
---

## Introduction

To avoid typing options every time and to ensure all uses of Jarl in a project are consistent, it is possible to store options in `jarl.toml`.

This file could look like this:

```toml
[lint]
# Only report violations about performance or correctness.
select = ["PERF", "CORR"]
# If "--fix" is used, only apply automatic fixes to performance-related
# violations.
fixable = ["PERF"]
# Exclude one or several specific files.
exclude = ["R/my_custom_autogenerated_file.R"]
# Use the default set of excluded files (mostly files that are automatically
# generated by other tools).
default-exclude = true
# Set the default assignment operator to report cases where "=" is used.
assignment = "<-"
```

These arguments (among others) are described below.

## Interaction between CLI arguments and config file

Arguments in the command line always have the priority on those specified in `jarl.toml`.
For example, if you have the following file:

```toml
[lint]
select = ["PERF", "length_test"]
ignore = []
```

then calling

```sh
jarl check . --ignore PERF
```

will only apply the rule `length_test`.

## Config file detection

Jarl follows a hierarchical strategy to detect the closest config file relative to the current working directory (inspired by [Ruff](https://docs.astral.sh/ruff/configuration/#config-file-discovery) in Python).

Jarl follows these steps:

1. look for `jarl.toml` in the current working directory;
1. if not present, go to the parent folder until a `jarl.toml` is found;
1. if none of the parent directories contain the config file, Jarl checks if one exists in the home config directory. For Unix users, it looks for `~/.config/jarl/jarl.toml`. For Windows users, it looks for `~/AppData/Roaming/jarl/jarl.toml`.
1. if the config file is not present there, then it stops looking for one.

Storing a default `jarl.toml` in the home config directory may be useful to apply some arguments by default on all R files.
For example, if you use `=` as assignment operator, you can set `assignment = "="` in `~/<config_dir>/jarl.toml` and all R files that don't belong to a project subject to another `jarl.toml` will use this argument.

Note that Jarl cannot handle multiple config files, it will use the first one it finds.

## Top-level arguments

### `select`

Select some rules by default.

This has the same capabilities as `--select`, so it is possible to pass rule names and names of groups of rules:

```toml
[lint]
select = ["PERF", "length_test"]
```

### `extend-select`

Select some rules in addition to `select`.

This is useful when you want to use the default set of rules *and* some additional opt-in rules.
In this scenario, you only need to add `extend-select = ["<some_rule>"]` instead of writing all default rule names.

This has the same constraints as `select`.

```toml
# Select all default rules and all `TESTTHAT` rules, which are disabled by
# default.
[lint]
extend-select = ["TESTTHAT"]
```

### `ignore`

Ignore some rules by default.

This has the same capabilities as `--ignore`, so it is possible to pass rule names and names of groups of rules:

```toml
[lint]
ignore = ["PERF", "length_test"]
```

### `include`

Files and/or directories that are checked. By default, Jarl checks all files
with a `.R`, `.qmd`, `.Rmd`, or `.rmd` extension.

When both `include` and `exclude` are specified, a file is checked only
if it matches at least one `include` pattern and does not match any
`exclude` pattern.

This takes a list relative paths to ignore:

```toml
[lint]
include = ["foo.R", "tests/"]
```

It also supports glob patterns:

```toml
[lint]
# Check only Rmd and qmd files
include = ["**/*{.Rmd,qmd}"]
```

### `exclude`

Files and/or directories that are not checked.

This takes a list relative paths to ignore:

```toml
[lint]
exclude = ["excluded.R", "tests/"]
```

It also supports glob patterns:

```toml
[lint]
exclude = ["excluded-*.R"]
```

### `default-exclude`

This takes a boolean argument indicating whether the default file exclude patterns are used.

By default, Jarl (just like the Air formatter) excludes a set of files and folders that are probably not worth checking, for instance because they are automatically generated by another program.

The complete list of default exclude patterns is:

* `.git/`
* `renv/`
* `revdep/`
* `cpp11.R`
* `RcppExports.R`
* `extendr-wrappers.R`
* `import-standalone-*.R`

```toml
[lint]
default-exclude = true
```

### `assignment`

**This argument is deprecated. Use the rule-specific argument `[lint.assignment]`
instead (see below).**

### `fixable`

This determines which rule violations will be fixed if `--fix` is passed.
This can be useful if you only trust Jarl's automatic fixes for some rules and want to avoid automatic fixes for other rules.
It takes a list of rule names or names or groups of rules, and defaults to all rules if this argument is not specified.

If a rule appears in both `fixable` and `unfixable`, `unfixable` takes precedence (i.e. violations of this rule will not be fixed).

```toml
[lint]
# Only fix violations of rules in the "PERF" group.
fixable = ["PERF"]
```

```toml
[lint]
# Do not fix any violation.
fixable = []
```

### `unfixable`

This determines which rule violations will be not fixed, even if `--fix` is passed.
This can be useful if you only trust Jarl's automatic fixes for some rules and want to avoid automatic fixes for other rules.
It takes a list of rule names or names or groups of rules, and defaults no rules if this argument is not specified.

If a rule appears in both `fixable` and `unfixable`, `unfixable` takes precedence (i.e. violations of this rule will not be fixed).

```toml
[lint]
# Fix all violations, except those for rules in the "PERF" group.
unfixable = ["PERF"]
```

```toml
[lint]
# Fix all violations.
unfixable = []
```

### `check-roxygen`

This takes a boolean argument indicating whether to check code in `roxygen2`
comments.
This only checks code in `@examples` and `@examplesIf` sections, and only if
the R file is part of an R package.

Default: `true`

```toml
[lint]
check-roxygen = true
```

### `fix-roxygen`

This takes a boolean argument indicating whether to apply automatic fixes to
code in `roxygen2` comments.
This fixes code if all following conditions are respected:

- the code is in `@examples` or `@examplesIf` sections
- the file is part of an R package
- `--fix` is passed in the command line

Default: `false`

```toml
[lint]
fix-roxygen = false
```

## Rule-specific arguments

### `assignment`

This takes a single value (`"<-"` or `"="`) indicating the preferred assignment
operator in the files to check. If `assignment = "<-"` and if the `"assignment"`
rule is enabled, then any use of the `"="` operator to assign values will be
reported, and vice-versa.

This option doesn't have a default value.

```toml
[lint]
...

[lint.assignment]
operator = "<-" # or "="
```

### `duplicated_arguments`

Use `skipped-functions` to fully replace the default list of functions that are
allowed to have duplicated arguments. Use `extend-skipped-functions` to add to
the default list. Specifying both is an error.

Function names in `skipped-functions` or `extend-skipped-functions` also match
namespaced calls, e.g. `skipped-functions = ["list2"]` will ignore `list2()` and
`rlang::list2()`.

Default: `skipped-functions = ["c", "mutate", "summarize", "transmute"]`

```toml
[lint]
...

[lint.duplicated_arguments]
# Ignore duplicated arguments in `list()` only.
skipped-functions = ["list"]
```

### `implicit_assignment`

Use `skipped-functions` to fully replace the default list of functions that are
allowed to contain implicit assignment. Use `extend-skipped-functions` to add to
the default list. Specifying both is an error.

Function names in `skipped-functions` or `extend-skipped-functions` also match
namespaced calls, e.g. `skipped-functions = ["list2"]` will ignore `list2()` and
`rlang::list2()`.

Default: `skipped-functions = ["expect_error", "expect_warning", "expect_message",
"expect_snapshot", "quote", "suppressMessages", "suppressWarnings"]`

```toml
[lint]
...

[lint.implicit_assignment]
# Ignore implicit assignment in `list()` only.
skipped-functions = ["list"]
```

### `quotes`

This takes a single value (`"single"` or `"double"`) indicating the preferred
quote style in the files to check. If `quote = "double"` and if the `"quotes"`
rule is enabled, then any use of single quotes `'` will be reported, and
vice-versa.

Default: `double`

```toml
[lint]
...

[lint.quotes]
quote = "single" # or "double"
```

### `unreachable_code`

Use `stopping-functions` to fully replace the default list of functions that are
considered to stop execution (never return). Use `extend-stopping-functions` to
add to the default list. Specifying both is an error.

Function names in `stopping-functions` or `extend-stopping-functions` also match
namespaced calls, e.g. `stopping-functions = ["abort"]` will consider `abort()`
and `rlang::abort()` as stopping functions.

Default: `stopping-functions = ["stop", ".Defunct", "abort", "cli_abort",
"q", "quit"]`.

```toml
[lint]
...

[lint.unreachable_code]
# Add a custom function to the list of stopping functions
extend-stopping-functions = ["my_custom_stop"]
```

### `unused_function`

Use `skipped-functions` to fully replace the default list of functions that are
allowed to be unused in the R package. Function names in `skipped-functions`
**are parsed as regular expressions** (this differs from other rules that have a
`skipped-functions` argument).

`unused_function` might return false positives because Jarl cannot statically
determine whether a function is used. By default, Jarl will hide `unused_function`
diagnostics if there are more than 50, as this would suggest that the package
has some internal mechanism to use those functions. This number can be changed
with the `threshold-ignore` argument.

Defaults:

- `skipped-functions = []`
- `threshold-ignore = 50`

```toml
[lint]
...

[lint.unused_function]
# Ignore all functions that start with "pl_" or "cs_", and the function
# "my.function"
skipped-functions = ["^cs_", "^pl_", "my\\.function"]
# Set a custom threshold above which diagnostics for this rule aren't reported
# (this is basically equivalent to never hiding unused functions).
threshold-ignore = 10000
```
